Breast milk benefits a baby
in many ways,
providing the right balance of nutrients,
helping to protect against
illnesses and infections,
and possibly helping with brain development.
Many of your baby’s physical
characteristics are designed
to help breastfeeding.
The mechanics of sucking
require as much contact as possible
between the baby’s tongue and jawbone,
and the mother’s breast.
To maximize contact,
an infant’s tongue is large
in comparison to the size of the mouth
and the cheeks contain fat
to help keep the tongue
in the proper position for sucking.
The same fat pads also ensure
that the cheeks don’t collapse while breastfeeding,
which would reduce the size of the mouth
and the negative pressure, required
to get milk from the breast into the mouth.
A newborn’s upper airway
through which air enters and leaves the lungs
also supports breastfeeding.
A newborn’s upper airway is very short.
And the epiglottis
a flap of tissue at the base of the tongue
that keeps food from going down the windpipe
touches the soft tissue at the back
of the roof of the mouth.
This combination of physical traits
helps direct milk to the esophagus,
which carries it to the stomach,
and reduces the risk of milk
going down the windpipe.
It also encourages the infant
to extend the neck,
which brings the lower jaw forward
to maximize contact with the breast.